Warm greetings, friends. Warm greetings. Hello. Wow. We made it. So we're back. I celebrate
that. I'm glad you're joining us. I'm glad everyone here is here. Thank you all. As we
usually do, according to the lineage instructions and our precious, kind teachers, Venerable
Kamparimachas, we'll begin by first turning our minds towards the Dharma. So,
reactivate that just gratefulness and that fresh, connected awareness to all
these amazing things we have going on for ourselves, all the conditions in our
favor, including our body, families, friends, air, earth, teachings, the
lineage. There's so many things we have to be thankful for in so many ways, so we
really kind of reconnect and bring this to the front, like brightly kind of
encourage this and just let this kind of fill your mind and your heart. So that's
this joy and appreciation or renunciation renouncing all the ways we
kind of get stuck and shut down. So we just put that aside for a moment and
kind of brighten, and then that immediately leads to wanting all beings
to brighten and to feel relieved and relaxed and refreshed and free and happy
and grateful to soar in their own nature. So this is bodhicitta, the heart, mind of
enlightenment. We all have this as our natural condition, this loving, kind,
compassionate, inclusive, flexible, wise, tuned in, sensitive, responsive nature we
have. This bodhicitta, our Buddha nature, mature nature of ourselves and of all
beings. So we all have this, so we want that nature to fully be what it is and
kind of just embody and embrace its own natural potential and elegance and to
manifest everything it could possibly be right now. So that's bodhicitta, and when
bodhicitta manifests fully, it naturally leads into pure perception, not just a
prison of samsaric existence and struggle and suffering and wondering, but
actually a delightful, enchanted experience of what it's like when
kindness prevails, when the dharma prevails, when the ten virtuous qualities
prevail, then this refinement, this bodhicitta kind of nature is allowed to
fully course through our doors of perception and our communication, our
environment, ourselves, ourselves, and so this pure perception, devotion, the
connectedness, the trust that this goodness is inside, and it's inside all
of us, and it's the very open, flexible fabric of reality. So we kind of turn all
of these things on, turn the mind towards the dharma, brighten our bodhicitta,
include all beings, and then see the goodness of everything and that
opportunity that's already right here with us now. So we'll just flash that on
now.
. What an amazing opportunity. So thank you all so much. Again, the title
of this topic, kind of this like little corner of reality, we're going to
contemplate briefly before going into the Dhujm Terasarnandra practice. It's
called creation and completion, dissolving rigidity to discover and
co-create worlds of enlightened activity. Creation and completion, dissolving
rigidity to discover and co-create worlds of enlightened activity. So we're
jumping right into the big, big, big, vast, profound Vajrayana view, which is what
we're doing every time with our nundra practice. And so we're going to just kind
of, in one way, step back and appreciate all these amazing qualities of our
minds, of the lineage, the lineage blessings, the teachings we've received,
and really connect to these innate, extraordinary qualities we have to
actually create and co-create and dissolve and release. And this is
specifically a Vajrayana set of techniques, but I think it's really
important to remember this isn't a Buddhist thing or a Vajrayana thing in
particular. We're constantly imagining our life. So our eyes open, our ears open,
our sense doors open, and they don't just meet some pre-given reality. They shape
what is happening. So we have this entire vast arena of sensory perception that
we can connect with and pay attention to or omit and distort, and literally it's
how our minds and bodies work all the time. So if we were totally aware of all
the sensory stimuli all the time, we would basically explode, because we're
not ready for that. This human vehicle I have is not ready to highlight everything
accurately. It can't. It can't now. I'm not ready for that. So I highlight certain
features of what my experience is, and I imagine and fill in all kinds of gaps. So
I like certain colors. I like certain shapes. I have a history of being scared
of certain noises. I like when someone says my name, especially when it like
sounds like nice. I don't like it so much when they say my name with like kind of
not so much nice sounding tone. This is just, I'm imagining. I'm like
totally choosing, picking and choosing the ways that this reality seems to just
be there. I'm selecting for all of this, and largely I don't know that I'm doing
this. It's unconscious. All these habit patterns I have to prefer this and avoid
that. Favor this, not favor that. This is a habitual mind, duality mind, and it's
just through and through. My body's used to doing it. My mind's used to doing it,
and I've done it so much that it just seems given like what my experience is.
This room. Who's in this room? What is happening here? How do I make sense of it?
I mean this is a very selective process. I am not tuned into all the patterns of
independence, interdependence happening now. In this little corner of the world,
on planet Earth, amidst all these planets, this vast field of interdependence, this
like very selective tiny little slice that is highly distorted, according to my
own sense doors. And yet it all coheres. It comes together as if it's given. This
seamless, given self-evident, this room is still here. My voice sounds similar. My
train of memories lines up in some kind of a story. Gravity goes down, pulls down.
These patterns just keep happening. So the point here is, is they're not just
out there. They're very much shaped by in here. So we're co, I'm co-shaping. I'm being
shaped by my environment, and I'm shaping it. This is interdependence. I'm being
affected by it, and I'm affecting it. Push and pull, come and go, up and down. And so
then the question for me is, how much am I including what's actually helpful for
me? How much am I actually like paying attention to the details that like
activate my joy and appreciation? To like awaken my bodhicitta? To like really see
more of a vast spectrum of the more subtle interdependence in the vast
arena of interdependence. How much am I doing that? And that's a big part of us
as Dharma practitioners. How much am I doing that? That's a very personal
question, and it's important we keep asking that. Because if we don't have a
flexible sense of me and a flexible sense of you and a flexible sense of us
in this world, in the environment, if we really just think this is all just this
way. There's no room to grow. There's no room to transform. There's no room to
liberate. It's just stuck. Very rigid. And this is largely a function of my own
mind, habitual mind. I'm not really paying attention and tuning in
sufficiently when I'm in this state. Same old, same old, same old. Me, me, me, me. I'm
just little old me. You're just little old you. And then eventually something
stops. And then we have suffering. This is a little, little slice. So the Buddha said
there's such a bigger way to open these doors, the sense doors. And the first step
towards this vast Vajrayana view is recognizing that I do this. I'm all the
time shaping my reality and my experience of what I see, what I
interpret, how I make sense of it, how I then engage it. This is an ongoing
visualization practice that I'm doing every single second. So my mind can do it.
Then it's the question of how well am I doing it? How much of the nature am I
including? And then the additional step, once I take a little responsibility for
wow, I'm really changing. I'm really shaping. I'm really selectively choosing
and rejecting so much stuff all the time. I'm doing this. My mind's doing this.
Once I say hey, I can, if I'm doing this, then I can do this better. That's called
responsibility that includes more freedom. And the beautiful next step is
if I'm doing this, then if you're a sentient being, you are too. And the
beauty of that is then I can tune in to your way of doing that more accurately
so that when you and I interact, it's more mutually beneficial, more mutually
uplifting. We both turn more towards the Dharma. This is called bodhisattva
activity. What's going on for you and your sphere and your arena and your
history and your kind of, although the woes and the triumphs and the victories
and the little quiet, everything's, you know, that make you feel like you. Because
I know some to agree what's going on inside of me a little bit. I'm so
unconscious of most of it. But the bodhisattva move is then, wow, if I'm
imagining shaping so much of this all the time and if you're a sentient being,
you are too, then how can we really co-create, not just be in an arena where I
shape the arena, but be with other people, be with other friends. And then we team
up and we pool our resources and we kind of line up with what's available for
each other. And then we can have such a power, this is called sangha, right? The
sangha of all sentient beings, then all Buddhists and all of Adriana Buddhists
and those in the mandala that have received his instructions and the
teacher at the same time. The bigger mandala is all sentient beings, that's
the big sangha. So what a bodhisattva is trying to do, when this bodhicitta
activates, is we're trying to tune in to other beings. What's happening with you?
What's your story? What are your beautiful things? Where do you need help
and support? And just to be available, to accommodate, right? That is always taught.
The Buddha always met the readiness, dispositions and capabilities of sentient
beings. Then a Buddha, just like a mirror, reflected what was appropriate and
helpful in that context for those beings and their habits. And that was that
meeting of that person's imaginal sphere, landscape, their relevance realization,
and the salient features, the way they populate their world. The Buddha said,
"Okay, given this game you're playing, this is the most optimal way of holding
that game. To make it omni-win. As many beings can win." Then the Buddha just saw
that point, because interdependence is there. The Buddha could see
interdependence clearly without distortion. Bing! This is the point that's
most optimal, with all the kind of moving parts. And then the Buddha released. It's
just a dream. And then let the dream's own natural intelligence auto correct itself.
Auto enhance. Self-knowing can come out. So with the right support, this
accommodating sensitivity, the Buddha would tune in. Bing! Hit just the right
spot. That's called a pith instruction. And then the system itself, the mind, the
body, the heart, the connectedness of that being, would start to fill itself out
more fully. Its own Buddha nature would start shining. So it had its own internal
integrity and power to then let its creative natural vitality and energy
fill in its world more fully. This is bodhicitta in action. This is the Buddhist
path. This is a six-part-mitra activity. This is more of like a cognitive
science kind of talking about it. But this is kind of part one way of talking
about this. It is very much lined up with Dharma, my small little understanding of
Dharma. So then now we have this bodhicitta. I'm taking responsibility. I'm
shaping these things. I want to shape it better, more fun, more inclusive, more
flexible, more of the nature, more of relationality. So we meditate, see an
object. I'm not the object. I see the object. Then we see two objects. Then we
see three, four, five. Then all of a sudden we're aware of interdependence. And we're
kind of then we get to have the power to choose which part we want to engage with.
And the more we can do that, the more freedom we have, the more personal power
we have, then all of a sudden you're doing it too. Then we can start to co-create
stuff together. This is starting to become a very self-aware mandala. And
then all we have all these lineage instructions and these living noble
beings who like that's their response. That's all they do. That's their
responsibility. We say please help me and they say yes I will. And they're way
past me. They're way past most sentient beings. I mean all sentient beings. But
they're so advanced. They see so much of relative truth and they see the nature of
all of it. And all they're doing is trying to optimize here, there, everywhere.
Constantly, according to what helps. What helps on the ground, in the context. That
they didn't create the context. My mind created the context. They just hit the
really little pivotal point and then let my mind and my heart start to
do its own, its own natural intelligence can come out. They give us, they have that
amazing kind of gentleness, Sheila, ethics, to tune into us and then like
really optimize the inside, the outside. And we start getting this own
intelligence, kind of awakens more further. And then we start having a
much more inclusive, expansive way of being, of making sense. We're less
selective. Less my way or the highway. More, oh what's going on? A little more
curious. More open exploration. And it's definitely more self-empowered. And that's
a beautiful thing. So then that kind of lays the ground for us to get into and
talk about this Vajrayana techniques a little bit. So this Vajrayana technique
specifically is going to go over quickly this three samadhi's in Maha Yoga. It's
the inner tantra view. This dudram tarasara practice is an inner tantra
practice. Maha Yoga, Anu Yoga, Ati Yoga. And these commentaries we have from our
precious teachers and as only as Dudram Rinpoche, they're exquisite. Everything's
there. And so here we're just really like, by even talking about them, referring to
them, it's like a direct blessing. We open the channel to receive the blessing and
the power, the support. To let ourselves think bigger. Let ourselves feel
more fully. And to not have it cram into the tiny little box of egoic me. But to
have it course through a more open free-flow experience of self and other.
Because let our bodhicitta open. Let our rigidity relax. Let this tight fist
of grasping the ice ball of fixation. Let it melt. And then the blessings can just
pour through and do what they do. The interconnectivity of reality can just do
what it does. It already knows what to do. We're just
locking onto a piece of it and then we kind of let itself rip us around, you
know. We tie this part of it, tie that part of it, tie that part. And then it
keeps moving because it's interdependence and then we kind of get
stretched and like have some sara. So this practice, we are really trying to
stretch in a very conscious, very sensitive, gentle, courageous, tuned-in way. We're
not trying to rip anything open. That's called a whatever. When something gets
ripped out, isn't that like extractive? You just take the piece you want and leave
everything else so they can wasteland. We're good at that. That's not what
Dharma is telling us we need to do. We need to little stretch a little bit. Think
a little bigger. Feel a little more fully. Accommodate someone else a little more.
Then we can gradually, organically, kind of let this whole co-created reality
we're sharing of the world and the contents, container and contained. We
optimize it more. And then eventually it's just doing what it's doing already.
So eventually we just stop interrupting it. We stop disrupting it and we go with
the flow. And then we can just celebrate and enjoy. Then we can actually be real
benefit here for in this tiny little finite time we have as human beings with
these bodies that get old and our minds that end up usually mainly get fuzzy and
confused. And so we can use this little window while we have that so much on our
side to generate more kindness, more appreciation for others and to really
like creatively create these spaces, these mandalas or just the Buddha nature
just starts popping on. And everyone's relieved. Wow finally I'm not this bad
person and all the guilt and all the everything you know. Bad me. We can just
relax and be like wow it's good me. This is good you. We're awesome. Let's do all
this awesome stuff together. This is getting into a Vajrayana view. This is
assumed in Vajrayana view and so we have to do the work to be able to get there
too. That takes a lot of conscious energetic work to really like get you
have that level of bravery and then to stretch just the right amount not too
much not too little that Goldilocks amount. Just enough so we have to show
up you know you get a little pressure to show up turn on brighten and then it's
kind of oh what's gonna happen here then you have to lean in and pay attention
it's not so big all at once so it's like and it's not so boring there's no
stress no pressure so it's just the same old habits you know. So it's not hell
realm too much pressure it's not every everything's easy luxury cruise liner
God realm land of opportunity the human realm just enough suffering but it's not
excruciating all the time and then we can actually show up and turn on it's a big
part of the fortunate human birth just the right amount of pressure and we can
actually intentionally try to do that in a more accelerated way where we grow
faster open more let more of our Buddha nature kind of inform how we're you know
creating things. So that's foundation and then there's three natures it's always
I have two books here the one is Venerable Kemperumice's essential journey of life
and death volume one. Everything we're looking at here they're all these
instructions are in this book if you if I was on a desert island I would want
more than one book but this would definitely be in the backpack. If I had a
kindle you know and like some infinite way to plug in to the island to have
infinite power I'd probably fly away from the island but if I couldn't this
would be one of the books essential journey in life and death volume one. And
then secondly this is a commentary on Karma Chagme Ragaase the union of Mahamudran
Zogchen Venerable Kemperumice gave a month long of teachings on this text
2011 at PSL and this is like really pithy instructions on a lot of things but one
of them is the union of creation and completion stages this Vajrayana
practice how to really bravely create enlightened worlds of enlightened
activity how to actually relax and see that's already really happening here
right now and if I just open the way I'm landscaping and terraforming everything
I'll start to see all this stuff I didn't see before just like all of a
sudden you get a higher caliber of kind of microscope or telescope nothing new
popped in all of a sudden I could see things a little newly a little more
clearly but then always I'm on the other side of the telescope so I'm selectively
seeing pieces of it so I really am co-creating it's not just some given
place out there it's much more interactive than that. So this true
nature this is here we'll go into the three three samadhi's, they've
mentioned this so many times this is the bedrock of Vajrayana visualization and
perfection practices creation and completion so there's two ways to do
creation and completion one is you build the mandala and you build optimal
basically an optimal universe for enlightened activity to happen and then
you relax and you let the activity happen that's called a gradual so you
have a you have like a seed syllable become a symbol become a deity become a
deity with hand implements become a deity with a retinue become a retinue
that extends with a protection boundary that pushes out all disruption and then
it gradually becomes like only a world of enlightened harmonious love compassion
and wisdom activity a living Buddha mandala and then we just rest and let
the mandala do the mandala activity and we can make offerings in the mandala
receive blessings in the mandala and then the deities bless us and they bless
everything and purify everything it naturally transforms into its nature
everything becomes spontaneous expression of deity mantra and dharmakaya
and then we rest and just let it do what it does so the resting parts the
completion stage practice dissolution we release the grasping onto any kind of
imaginal anything and we just let that very open perspective inform us with its
natural wisdom display that's called a gradual creation and completion and this
book this is quintessence of union of Mahamudra and Zogchen this is with
commentary by Kimbal Kartar Rinpoche the former abbot of KTD Karmatriyana
Dharmachakra so this book and by Ragaase I'll just read from the end and the root
verse this is song 5 this is talking about the essence of the creation and
completion stages which is the topic so here we are in the Vajrayana you know
version of this topic page 250 song 5 the root meaning the path of generation and
completions union this has what has to be known and what has to be meditated the
essence of the mind of all beings is primordially the essence of Buddhahood
its empty essence is the birthless dharmakaya it's clear distinct
appearances are the Sambhogakaya it's unceasing compassion is the variegated
nirmanakaya the inseparable union of those three is the Sava Bhikka Kaya its
eternal changelessness is the Maha Suka Kaya this is Ragaase this primordial
innate presence in yourself was not created by the compassion of the Buddhas
by the blessings of the gurus or by the profound special essentials of the Dharma
wisdom has primordially been present in this way all the sutras and tantras are
in accord on this then why are we wandering in samsara we do this because
of the delusion of not knowing ourselves for example we are like a man who has
gold hearthstones but does not know they are gold and suffers from starvation but
given the direct recognition of this is the great kindness of the guru you may
recognize the gold but that will not dispel the hunger you must sell it and
prepare food by frying cooking or roasting it and then eating it will end
the hunger in the same way after the guru gives you the direct recognition
through practice your mistake will be eliminated and you will be liberated the
Mahayana sutras and the montreana tantras are all in agreement that your own mind
in that way is Buddhahood however the sutras do not provide the direct
recognition that your body is Buddhahood and therefore it is a long path
achieving Buddhahood after three incalculable eons the highest tantras
have the methods for attaining Buddhahood within one lifetime they are
profound because of the direct recognition of your own body as the
deities therefore the highest tantras teach in complete detail that your own
body is the mandala of the deity such as Samvara Guryasamaja the eight Haruka's
and so on in brief the sarma and ningma are in accord that the five skandhas are
the five buddhas the five elements are the five consorts the eight
consciousnesses are the eight bodhisattvas and the eight sensory objects
are the eight female bodhisattvas and this song continues to elaborate some of
the detail of what we kind of tune into when all of a sudden we relax and let
our nature do what it does so we're not just imagining something or pretending
according to this view the Buddha's view of the tantras and even the sutra view
that we have this innate essence this Buddha nature so very quickly the three
samadhis which are discussed extensively in all of these teaching we've received
these and it's in Rinpoche's commentary on the due jimter Saranandru the first
is a true nature samadhi the second is the all-arising compassion samadhi and
the third is the seed syllable causal samadhi so raga asi just went over this
he just didn't use these terms so the true nature samadhi recognize your own
nature now so here this is this is the view of the sudden approach of the union
of creation completion stages not the gradual or we build from the outside and
then release and relax this is the sudden approach the union of creation
and completion so it starts with the true nature samadhi recognize your nature
now in that recognition it's unstoppable the compassionate arising energy that
naturally includes everything not because something turned it on not
because something bad happened but it just naturally is inclusive and
compassionate nothing is left out of the nature everything is accommodated and
included this five wisdom teachings in the tantras say so much about this and
then when that natural all-arising compassionate energy which is just
spontaneously there take shape this is called the seed syllable samadhi or the
causal samadhi and this in terms of visualization practices when this
emptiness awareness with its clear knowing quality starts to compassionately
responsibly take form to alleviate the suffering of all beings this is where a
mandala comes from so from the true nature and its pervasive compassion it
starts to distill into featured forms salient landscapes and that goes
according to the sadhana practice and the lineage instructions of that practice
so we imagine Lee follow this lineage sequence we pretend so that eventually
we actually see this is one avenue that how the nature actually shapes itself
when we show up and really fully participate with it so we go from the
true nature it's unstoppable pervasive compassionate energy that starts to
distill into a seed syllable that becomes a ritual object usually on a
lotus with some common of seed that then becomes more more form as an entity a
deity with features and in the features and then there's other deities
enlightened beings around them as a retinue and on and on the mandala
populates a universe of enlightened activity and we have the big bigness the
giant kind of gigantic vision view tawa that this is possible the nature is
possibly like this this courageous view and we just like let ourselves tune into
it this is a big feature of being a Vajrayana practitioner we have that
level of bravery we're really trying to encourage that in ourselves this could
be true and in our sadhana practice time we let ourselves be in that view and we
don't disrupt it with what's going on and what are the features and that's the
post meditation study contemplation time which definitely is vitally important
and is skipped way too often then there's the meditation time where we just let
ourselves be in the imaginal space the visualization the creation stage that's
arising from the true nature and we use our natural capacities our body our
speech our mind as tantra practitioners not just enlightened wake wakefulness
or wisdom because that was shown in Zen Zen mind beginners mind formless like
wakeful attention wisdom wisdom mind but this also includes wisdom speech and
wisdom body the world and its inhabitants the semi-form and the form
this is pure body pure speech pure mind so this is a tantra view so this is a
very quick kind of jumping into the three samadhi's which are the root it's
the bedrock assumption of all of the Tibetan Buddhist visualization practice
including the due jimter sarnandra and how amazing we start our whole sequence
of practice with such a profound such a profound kind of a method like how
amazing like we've been like to do the we're so blessed these wisdom beings
like have so generously offered this to us now and but we still have to line up
with kind of like we have to make sense of it to some degree know some essential
points apply them over time in a dedicated way let them change us let
them inform and kind of open our natural capacities and just be with them and let
the nature do what it does let the blessings do what they do so that's the
three natures very succinctly like like embarrassingly succinctly it's very
quick there's so many teachings on this and we should really study them and I
need to study them a whole lot more then we really more importantly need to apply
them practice them and let them change us we we'd like we'd like have the
instructions we like know what the map is and then we start like actually using
our own mind and heart to like be in that terrain like to take that inner
journey and populate it with that world space according to the instructions as
sadhana is just saying now it's like this now it's like this now you see this now
you move this way now this happens and then it arises and it moves it it's
literally we're just it's like we're watching a movie but the movies our own
mind and heart and we're letting it unfold according to the lineage
structure and then it just takes us there like a conveyor belt that's what a
Yana is a vehicle just like takes us along and then we're says hi you're
here and then we're like finally and then we can relax put all this endless
drama behind us and then to actually be available to help beings not just hurt
them and hurt ourselves and all the kind of crazy things we do these are the
three samadhi's then there's three qualities that Kemba Rinpoche and he
went over extensively in this book a central journey of life and death
volume one indestructible nature of body speech and mind this is just so many
precious teachings I mean really this is so so precious the three qualities are
clarity purity and stability and these are related to the three samadhi's -
there's so much we can say about this stuff the true nature true nature of
samadhi to go back true nature samadhi purifies the dying purifies the form
realm the true nature samadhi is so open doesn't hold on to anything so when
we're dissolving then it purifies the tendency to want to hold on to something
in formless realms we there's no thing to hold on to it purifies the habit to
get rigid lock in all arising compassion samadhi they say purifies the all the
form realms with very subtle level form not here we're to the desire realm the
form realm it purifies the after-death Bardo when the true nature just in all
of its glory just booms out with sounds and lights and shapes in this natural
mandala of our body that's been locked in this human fleshy vessel the body
stops boom the nature shines out as peaceful wrathful deities and this all
arising samadhi all arising compassion samadhi purifies our sense of like seeing
who these Buddhas are actually showing up our nature is showing up as our best
friend but we see it as an adversary as an enemy as a stranger and we run away
purifies the habit to run away from how amazing we are this booming vital energy
we have well I just want this version of meditation I just want to look at this
part of reality not the whole thing this this one little piece it purifies the
habit so not only does it purify the habit to just start to lock but to lock
into one thing so this that true nature or sorry the all rising compassion
samadhi purifies the habit of the semi form or so the form realms and speech the
semi form the energy the wind and then they say thirdly then that final third
samadhi the seed syllable samadhi purifies becoming in birth right so just
like the seed syllable samadhi arises out of emptiness and clarity their union it
arises purely so it's pure birth pure manifestation pure expression and then
we get to train and like oh how is this life like a pure expression of the
mandala as a deity with a retinue all these deities everyone's a deity doing
enlightened activities for the benefit of all beings it purifies our habit to
for birth in a samsaric way the habits are just blocking so tight to this me my
body my history my all that it purifies that tight tight tight grasping and it
opens it and it purifies they say the desire realm which is this sentient realm
that humans are a part of here and it purifies body it is negative habits of
body so we purify our mind our speech our body with these three samadhi's so
then what's left is the wisdom and dala of the enlightened speech enlightened
mind and lightened body of all the buddhas that's the only thing that could
be left once all the rigidity is dissolved the world becomes enlightened
activity that's because it we see that that was happening and then we gain the
power to like co creatively play with it and actually serve the lineage become a
node of kind of activating people activating beings so they're like fully
supported exactly how they need to be supported and their Buddha nature just
shines on because all the tensions start to you know gradually melt away it takes
all this it takes time we all know if we're still here listening to this rant
and if we're still here practicing we keep showing up the Vajrayana
practitioners then we know this takes time and we have to stay dedicated and
committed flexibly stretch little stretch little stretch little stretch
little stretch and we gain our capacity we kind of reaffirm our kind of majesty
as a naturally enlightened pure being we're like trying to really kind of let
ourselves but confidently bravely believe that and so then this really
goes and very quickly into the these three points for all union of creation
and completion practices clarity stability purity clarity is like the
all the qualities of the deities everything's bright and it has a profound
meaning so we're trying to bring the detailed brightness and like really
connect to the meaning of the visualization let those deeper
meanings like saturate and populate our experience they become the mandala that's
like the quality like the features and then the second is the purity it's
actually free of any fixation we just let the mandala do what it does without
holding it grasping it reifying it locking it freezing it and I know that's
like a fear-inspiring thing to let go but we let go and then the nature is
more empowered to do what it does it's less funneled through me it's more just
allowed to interdependently arise for the benefit of beings which that's what it
all naturally do if we stop trying to like attaching our strings to everything
and then stability is that confidence the Vajra pride the utter conviction the
certainty the bravery the fearlessness to just this is it this is a pure mandala
a pure a pure-bodied pure speech pure mind and I'm gonna in this session I'm
gonna show up and just not have any doubt be here be with Gurum jay be with the
Herukas be with the Buddhas and the bodhisattvas and the Aras and all the
Dharma and all the lineage masters all in their field of blessing energy and
that's all that's here and just be with it and just surrender to it and it's
only gonna be loving and compassionate and wise and we have this total field
where then we can totally be kind of really transformed by the lineage
blessings so we can let go and like be reshaped and reactivate all these
goodness qualities of ourselves instead of reactivate all the kind of like
scared fearful qualities of ourselves can really kind of finally be at home
with ourselves and with each other and then this courageous view then it all it
does is do outreaching bodhisattva activities and what does that mean it's
always turning towards the Dom Dharma the nature it always has this
renunciation bodhicitta and pure perception or devotion all three are
always combined in these practices so this is a kind of very quick whirlwind
kind of tour clarity purity stability clear visualization really connect to
the meaning and without rigidity and fixation and then really if they say the
Vajra pride can also be talked about as feeling the presence of the Buddha of
the Buddhas of the living mandala not just my pretend visualization but
actually letting the jhana sappas the wisdom beings inhabit and become utterly
mingled and merged that literally everything I see and hear and think is
Buddha activity and then we rest with that and we let it happen and do its own
natural thing and it starts to get all these more robust salient features and
the details get sharper and the devotion gets stronger the heartache for all the
beings that don't see how awesome they are just gets so tender and we have the
courage really that unstoppable compassion I will take responsibility to
free all these beings free them from what from not seeing how awesome they are
that's it how to do that meet them where they are whatever is available to just
have their own mandala auto-enhance not a forceful conversion just line up with
them support and then they can relax hold on to fight this person's on my
side finally a friend they relax and then the qualities start coming out and
then they just again and again and then they get to inhabit their own bravery
and their own unique way and they get to create their mandala and then I create
my mandala you create your mandala we create our mandalas now we're talking
about really for real Vajrayana view they said this is already how the nature
is and we need these sadhana practices that just there's these supports they'll
set it up it's like in t-ball or something make it almost impossible to
hit and then you just boom you know but we're like it's like a it's like these
mega baseball stars playing t-ball like if you don't hit a home run every time
sums up so we have to keep checking in we have these innate capacities a little
by little it's a tender thing just the Goldilocks right amount of stretching
not too hot not too cold not too tight not too loose this is all really
straight-up Dharma I'm not just trying to like make some things up so but our
time is always limited in these things and then we have to get to the practice
time where we really in this and hopefully like we were let it let
ourselves be in this anyway and don't have to wait till just sitting down on a
cushion to actually check in with our true nature that's why are these three
samadis are always available be with a nature it's naturally compassionate and
let your own sense doors like fill it in with these beautiful colors and shapes
and sounds and just like relax and just like playfully engage and do that for a
minute and then you can go back to you know making widgets for the benefit of
all beings or whatever the artistic offering is because widgets make this
world go round thank you friends thank you thank you
I give a final thought quick final thought I didn't get to it because I ran
out of time but in terms of creation and completion and kind of the amazing
opportunity of discovering and co-creating worlds of enlightened
activity it's quite a big it's a big statement and the one thing I didn't get
to is the need to always have discernment or prajna there's not a
single teaching in Buddhism that says what you need to do right now is turn
off your prajna it's always a sharpening of prajna more clearly attuning and
seeing what helps now what is happening now causally speaking like what are the
causes and conditions happening now so I can most optimally be shaped by and work
with situations with life with my experience and the one thing I'm always
going to come in contact with is my own mind and so I need to always keep
turning towards wisdom and that wisdom would expand as it expands it wants to
include more of the nature of reality relative reality and absolute reality
and so it's naturally going to also have to soften and become more compassionate
and inclusive so it's going to get more fierce and brave to accommodate more of
the nature it's going to more compassionately include accommodate and
uplift but we need to do it as we're ready according to what is helpful for
my mind now so we need a lineage to offer a next step guidance and next next
next next step guidance to give a map and we need the sangha support to keep us
in check we need direct feedback from teachers from those way ahead of us so
we can kind of avoid certain kind of ways of shutting down of kind of just of
like taking on someone else's arena when it's I'm not ready to take on that arena
or maybe there's something someone else is doing or a situation that's I don't
want to be shaped by that I'm not ready for it I don't want to it's not healthy
we need this discernment so always prajna should to go on
bodhicitta and compassion should go on because I'm always going to be experiencing
my own mind and as my imaginal capacities increase also the personal power
increases bhajriyana talks about that as skillful activity so we have a teacher
have a lineage have a guidance that basically they're going to kind of
introduce some new things that make us show up a little more fully but it's
always me who's the one who has to show up and that's always according to what
I'm ready for and I need to use that wisdom discriminating or discerning
wisdom to actually play within a wider arena of Darmadatta to recognize not
play favorites within the things in the Darmadatta because they're all the same
nature of reflections but to not mix and match the reflections and the causation
because that's what mirror like wisdom is doing so all these five wisdoms in
terms of creation and completion practices we need to be clear that we
have to like include all of them all of them are included in prajna and I think
that's so it should be a softening of heart and a clarifying of mind and then
we'll kind of like be able to like have that bravery the courageous view to
really let ourselves like see everything is the mandala of deity mantra and
dharmakaya